Hi. I'd like to introduce Thomas John,
who has been a Quant Researcher and Portfolio
Manager at BlackRock's systematic active equity,
as well as Goldman Sachs.
Thomas is here to share what it's like to be a quant.
Hi. I'm glad to be here.
So Thomas, what is a quant?
A quant is someone who's good at using technology,
math and statistics to solve business problems.
This can take various forms and can be in different parts of the business.
But the common factor in all of this is depth and fluency and
quantitative skills that comes from a long background of having worked on this.
The hallmark of a quant is total comfort with number-crunching.
This doesn't necessarily mean that on any given day,
a quant is working on very sophisticated math necessarily.
But they're ready to deploy these skills as needed.
Even in areas not previously mastered,
a quant would be ready to jump in and pick
up the technical machinery needed to address the problem.
I've never heard of a quant who backed away from some problem,
because it was too hard,
technically, usually only due to time constraints or other business reasons.
This mindset and willingness to tackle hard problems
is essential to have in any large modern financial firm.
There are other colleagues in these firms
who might be very skilled at other aspects of the business,
but do not have the quant mindset.
So quants bring something unique to the table.
Interesting, what are the different types of quants?
There are various types of quantrols,
on both the sell side and the buy side.
On the sell side, you could be a quant on the trading desk,
working on models for pricing and trading,
and also participating in building and running some parts of the trading infrastructure.
In some firms, you can be a sales quant,
which is also an interesting role.
Developing certain products and interacting more with clients.
Pitching trade ideas based on the market environment,
which if attractive to clients will be traded with the trading desk.
As the name suggests,
the desk quants are attached to trading teams and the sales quant work with sales teams.
In investment management, there are somewhat similar roles.
In addition, there is the role of quantitative portfolio management.
There are also excellent quantrols such as risk modeling or roles in the middle office.
Roles such as market risk and firm-wide risk.
So Thomas, how did you decide to be a quant researcher and portfolio manager?
It's one of the most interesting areas to work in if you have a clock background.
I don't say that lightly because I come from an aerospace engineering background,
which was already very interesting.
Finance is an ever-changing field,
where a lot of new things emerge and need to be
modeled and understood and one can have an impact rapidly.
This can be very satisfying or unsettling depending on your type.
The conversation and financial firms results are attractive on average.
When I was coming out of graduate school,
I wasn't going to complain about that either.
What background knowledge do you recommend for those who want to be a quant?
That traditional background for a quant has been a strong knowledge of mathematics,
probability, and statistics, as well as competition.
In addition to knowing a sufficient amount of
financial math and knowing how the markets work.
For the last part, a candidate is expected to pick up as
much as they can if they don't already have some background in finance,
much will have to be learned with experience at work, of course.
But for the quantrols,
you'd be expected to already be strong in
the non-financial skills like math and computation,
as they are harder to develop while working.
Good point, what is the best way to develop market intuition?
There are different ways to do it.
One is to have your own portfolio and see how the financial conditions impacted.
Also, sometimes schools hold paper portfolio competitions for students.
I also recommend that you read and soak in all the financial news you can
get your hands on from sources such as The Financial Times,
Wall Street Journal, and Bloomberg.
The Economist magazine also has a finance and economics section.
So what does a typical day of a quant look like?
There is no such thing as a typical day.
But count on heavy number-crunching,
whether that is simple or complex can depend on the role.
But what really matters is that it should have business impact.
Great. Thanks so much for sharing.
You are welcome.